One of the great mysteries of the world
has been the Shroud of Turin,
in which the image of a man many believe is Jesus
is in effect burned into a piece of cloth.
James Barrett has spent the last seven years
researching the scientific data
that's been gathered on the shroud
and has expanded the research to include
ancient spiritual technologies.
The result of this melding of science and spiritual wisdom
is the discovery of a signature frequency
of the human heart that allows for ascension.
The frequency of compassion.
(peaceful music)
We're talking about
the intelligence of the heart.
This is a subject that's been for the last decade
beginning to come to the forefront,
but you're looking at it in an entirely fresh way.
We're going to get into that,
but first of all what is it in you,
in your background,
that set you on this path to begin with?
Well, I guess it started really with
this interest in the mystical traditions
and looking at the different mystical traditions.
Raised a Catholic,
there was the Sacred Heart and the Immaculate Heart.
From all the traditions,
even in the Egyptian, you come back to the purified heart.
I looked more deeply from those perspectives,
from the mystical traditions,
at the heart.
As you looked at it in depth,
they kept putting it towards attunement,
alignment, harmony.
They used words and descriptions
that seemed to me
that if you were in this day and age,
we should be able to look at that,
find a signature for that,
and gradually that's what we worked into.
How does this blend in with
or dovetail somewhat with the work
at the HeartMath Institute?
We can start seeing where things flow in and flow out.
A little bit later I want to get into how
the technology itself was developed.
Right, well the HeartMath is a wonderful institution.
They've done wonderful work
and they look at the heart strictly
from heart rate variability,
which is a specific spectrum of the wave form.
Not to get too technical,
but when you look at the spectrum
or the harmonic of the heart
and you take out the lower slices,
the long waves in the really low area,
you can look at it in the time domain,
or you can look at in the the frequency domain,
or both.
You can look at the frequencies and see what's going on,
or you can look at it in the time domain.
Originally heart rate variability
was just looking at the differences
between beat to beat
in respect to the breathing, to respiration,
but as they looked into it more closely,
you could find a lot of information embedded
within the harmonics that are present
in the low frequency ranges of the heart.
When you clap your hands,
there's a whole spectrum of frequencies that are present
in that one sound.
When your heart beats,
there's a symphony of frequencies present,
and you can look at the really long low waves.
Heart rate variability is below a half a hertz.
That's a long wave, okay?
Yes.
What that information tells you and talks to you about
is about the autonomic nervous system
and the different branches of it,
the parasympathetic and sympathetic.
Those two, one speeds you up and one slows you down.
They work through the heart to do that
and all the different organs come into play,
the adrenals and your breathing and perspiration
and things like this.
As they come into phase or balance,
what was found was that you have
optimizing your immune system,
you had greater peace,
and then they found that a lot of that
had to do with the psychological positioning you were in
at the moment, so gratitude and appreciation.
Genuine feelings, positive feelings
tended to enhance
positive heart rate variability.
When they looked into this in depth,
they found that heart rate variability
is at the core of most chronic diseases.
That's pretty important.
That's what the ancients understood.
Oh, yeah.
We'll bring this full circle
with what they found with what the ancients also knew,
running through your work as well.
In the mid '90s,
what made you decide to get involved with this,
even down to the technology
of utilizing technology to interface
and read the rhythms of the heart yourself?
Well, originally I built a healing retreat center
with a bunch of people over in North Carolina,
and at this center
I witnessed different levels of healing
that previous to that time
I didn't think was really possible,
understanding what I understood about the body
and how the body worked.
Currently, I understand it to be much different.
My interest in human potentiality
and what you're capable of,
because you look at the medical literature,
the volumes of people with spontaneous healings,
spiritual traditions, all these things that they do.
How is that possible?
For me, it seemed to always come back
to centering on the heart.
When I found out early in the '90s
that the heart was autogenic,
what means it doesn't have an outside source to beat,
in other words it doesn't get information from the brain
or any other source for its operations,
I was like, "That's a pretty important fact right there."
Then when I heard from a coroner at one time
that there were neural cells embedded
in the tissue of the heart,
and then through the mystical traditions
the idea of the heart having its own innate intelligence
and aims and desires,
started to dovetail together for me.
To see how one issue
related to the other issues
and they all seemed to fit.
Heart rate variability, if you understand it,
really is at a point today
where they are literally talking yoga. (laughs)
Right, right.
(laughs) Science is dovetailing yoga.
The science of yoga,
you can look at it from Western medical perspectives.
The idea for me was how and what is the actual signature
that you're actually looking for?
What is the optimized signature
for what the ancients would say
would be an open, a receptive, compassionate heart?
That's what you were looking for
when you had started developing your ...
It was a little device
that essentially is an EKG device
but developed for a different purpose.
We looked at,
we tried to develop a device
that not only looked at the harmonic,
but looked at the relationship of the harmonic.
The reason for this was because in mathematics
and geometry and sacred geometry,
there are models that help to describe
openness and receptivity and things of that nature.
We were looking to see if those same things were present
in the harmonic, the relationship of the frequencies
at that time.
There was several people that helped
to come up with a methodology of doing that,
plus the computer speeds increased at that time.
There was a lot of things that came together,
the internet.
They all weren't really present prior to this time,
and when they started to be developed,
they were in their infancy.
Now, as we pushed to the mid '90s,
we had the tools available to actually start to
conceptualize something that would be able to be hooked up,
use the ECG information,
and then transform that using fast Fourier transforms
in a way that we could look at the information
from a novel perspective.
A different way.
As you developed this technology,
what did you begin discovering
that has put you even further on your path
of inquiry and discovery into --
Great question.
This is the question.
For me personally, when you sat down and you looked at,
this is a feedback device,
so you're seeing your heart's music in real time,
or what we perceive as real time.
There's a whole story that we can go into there
about that information
because real time is pretty interesting in and of itself.
When you looked at your information,
you could see how thought and thinking affected the heart,
and then what you noticed if you were paying attention
or did this at any degree of frequency,
you'd notice that you were watching your thoughts.
The question that rose inside me is
what's watching my thoughts?
Right, that's what I was just going to ask.
What's watching?
In science, in consciousness research,
you would call it the witnessing or non-local self
because you can't pinpoint it in any one place.
Actually Candace Pert and people like that,
looking at emotions,
found that mind plays the central role in development
and it happens spontaneous
through quantum mechanical processes.
Quantum coherence, quantum entanglement,
things of this nature.
All those type of things that happen with the body
at the small level
really begin and originate out of an impulse
that comes from a non-local or quantum,
that's a conceptual idea of it, place.
The intelligence, which we might call the soul,
impulses through,
and when I researched it in more depth,
the Sufis have the best model for this.
You have the egoic self
that deals in past and future.
It's process deals in time.
The heart deals in the present.
It deals in the now.
It creates reality for you.
The soul deals in the eternal.
It's timeless, meaning no time.
Not endless time, no time.
It's atemporal.
This aspect of mind self
pulls on the heart for the creation of reality
and the egoic self that helps you stay here, present,
getting to some place on time,
it deals with time.
Those two aspects pull on the heart
for the creation of your reality.
They impulse your heart,
and if the egoic self, survival based, is more strong
then that's what becomes your reality
and if the soul level is more powerful,
then for sure you need more courage in your life
because that's why it's a heart quality.
Without courage --
Without courage.
... you don't follow the soul so easily.
That is so true.
It's not interested in your survival.
It's eternal, the soul.
Its goal is the attainment of
self recognition
on a very large level.
Self awareness on a very broad spectrum
of understanding that term,
not just understanding me,
why I do the things I do,
but understanding truly the nature of self
and the broad scheme of things.
It goes from spiritual, back into the mystical,
back into the scientific.
The scientific is in the same place.
Right, it's all coming from the same place.
It's all --
It's just a different vocabulary.
The awareness that is the mind in the now,
and the awareness that's in the present,
is the heart actually speaking through you.
Heart intelligence has a knowing
about your real reason to be here.
Your dharma, your purpose.
It calls you, it yearns.
When you're yearning is pulling you someplace
even thought the egoic self says,
"If we do that, we might not have any money.
"We might be broke.
"We might want to think this twice.
"We tried this in the '80s and it didn't work."
This is the heart, and that's calling from the soul.
That's my understanding of it.
That's what is the interesting about the device,
is that when we played with this on any level,
you kept coming back to noticing
that there was an aspect of yourself
witnessing this.
When my son passed away in 2000,
I experienced this on a extended period of time.
My desires shifted from wanting to create
the device and the company and the tools
to more or less wishing to research the information
and validate the experience in a rational way.
Which led you to publishing a book,
The Silent Gospel.
Seven years, it's taken.
Seven years it's taken
to publish The Silent Gospel,
which is quite interesting.
It would almost seem like a non sequitur,
but it's not
because you go into the analysis on a profound level
of the Shroud of Turin,
which of course is still one of the great mysteries.
Can you go ahead and then make the leap from where you were,
what you had discovered at that point in time,
the path you were already on,
all of the new questions and such that came up
as a result of the death of your son,
to seven years later publishing this book, The Silent Gospel
and why you've done it and what it's about?
That's a really big question --
It's a lot of questions in one question.
The long and the short is that
I had a real deep interest in human potentiality
and the mystical traditions
and understanding myself
and heart intelligence.
During the process of burying my son,
he had a book on his nightstand on the Shroud of Turin,
and I had a true epiphany.
Those big ah-has where everything is clear and simple.
It's taken seven years
and a lot of water has gone under the bridge
to get to this place,
but at that moment in time it seemed like it's perfect.
I could use the shroud and explain how the image
was created on the shroud
using the value that I've learned on compassion.
The teachings of all the great masters,
not just Jesus, but all of the masters,
Buddha lived 500 years before Jesus.
The Vedas are from 1500 years before Jesus.
There's a history and a development here
of understanding human physicality
on a level that we are just coming to understand again.
There's a renaissance of understanding this.
The quantum, What the Bleep,
the law of attraction, and these different ideas that --
The Secret.
The Secret, they're all coming out now with
bits of understanding this broader concept
about our true nature,
what we are truly come from.
What we are part of.
As I put the two together in that big ah-ha moment,
I literally received the complete
table of contents for the book.
I said, "If I do this and I do this
"and I show this and I show that,
"it all makes perfect sense to me."
Then as you do it and somebody else looks at it,
they say, "How did you get from here to there?"
To actually tie all the points together,
I just put chapters helping the individual
expand their own level of imagination.
In medical science there's a new operation that's done,
it's called the still point.
The still point?
Yeah.
What is that?
It's an operation they do when you have
a blood vessel exploding in your head,
and they literally bring your body temperature down to 58.
They stop your brainwaves and your heart,
and the drain blood from your body
so there's no pressure on the vessel.
Right, right.
They fix the vessel,
they reintroduce everything.
You're literally beyond dead, technically.
Right.
They drain the blood, your body temperature,
no brainwaves, no heart waves,
and then people reconstitute and come back.
Most of them, when they come back,
the ones that survive, which is the majority of them --
The majority truly survive those?
Yes, and there's several good books on the subject.
Actually down in Arizona is where they perform this
most of the time.
Literally, these people when they come back
talk about watching the operation.
The body is totally
no electrical activity.
Yes.
They come back into the physical body.
It speaks loudly about this other aspect of ourself.
This non-local witnessing aspect
that we're understanding now from consciousness research,
that the ancients might call your soul.
Right, right.
This aspect, when you align that with your heart
and the egoic self,
creates a unique attunement,
attunement that you can actually see
in the balance between the parasympathetic
and the sympathetic.
You can see in the immune system.
You can see in the DNA.
You can see in the whole broad range
of physical attributes and characteristics.
You feel joy or at peace.
It does seem though,
that that procedure's a little dicey.
It's very dicey, it's a last --
It's a ...
You're going to die.
It's a choice as to whether you wish to have
what is called the near death experience or not (laughs).
I suppose it's better than the alternative.
Quite interesting.
Depending on the intention of that soul,
they do or don't come back.
Right.
Depending on what's appropriate
for its future development and growth.
Not only that,
but they'll actually tell about what happened in the room
or what happened up on the second floor of the hospital.
Yes, as witnessing, right.
It's an out of body experience,
but literally the body,
there's no brainwaves and the heart is stopped
and the blood is literally drained from the body
so they can create this opportunity to fix.
This operation doesn't happen in 10 minutes.
We're talking about an hour and a half
of being in this state or longer.
Right, amazing.
That animating force, the soul force,
as it joins back with the body then you restore life.
Without that, you don't have life anyway.
Right.
Continue on, then.
You have the table of contents now,
and you've had your epiphany.
Right.
You're now going to begin
taking compassion on, on a new level of understanding.
How did the subject of the shroud feed into all of this?
If you watch any of the Shroud of Turin programs on TV,
the Discovery Channel,
what you'll see there is a sanitized version
of what the real, true researchers into the subject know.
If the people that actually researched the object
have come to these conclusions about the object,
there's a lot of science.
First off, in 1973
a group took a photo of the shroud
and they took it and they put it through a NASA device
called a VP8 analyzer,
and this picture when it went through the analyzer,
generated a 3D image
of the body laying under the cloth.
Wow.
No other painting or picture or object
single picture does that.
This tool was created to take pictures from outer space
and generate topography.
When that happened, it generated a lot of interest
in the scientific community.
In 1978, a group that was called
the Shroud of Turin research project,
about 24 people went over
and did all sorts of experimentation.
Photos, they took sticky tape.
They did an enormous amount of research
in about a five day period.
All that research that they took
has been studied and studied and studied.
They understand how the image was placed
in terms of the medium.
It was light or energy.
There's a starch on it,
and this starch literally embedded
in some unique, perfect way the image
in perfect resolution.
The camera right now is capturing me in perfect resolution
in a certain plane.
The Shroud of Turin is in perfect resolution,
the front and the back,
even though this cloth was laying over this body.
There were coins on the eyes, flowers around the head,
there's pollen dust, there's rock dust,
there's blood, there's forensic evidence.
There's a wealth of material
and when you look at the whole body of material,
it's pretty consistent that this object
came from the first century
and that a man died a very violent, torturous death
inside the cloth.
The forensic evidence is clear on that.
How did a man,
because we can't do it today,
and how come it hasn't been done several time since then?
Even if it was done in the 1300s,
how come it hasn't been done again and again and again?
Produce an image on a cloth
and the image is in negative.
It's not even in positive.
It wasn't until like 1898,
when a photographer took the first picture of it,
and when he was developing the picture in his dark room,
saw the actual image arise in the negative.
It's an incredible, incredible thing.
For me personally, after researching it,
the shroud is intended for this period of time.
The message that's embedded in those,
you know the old saying, "A picture tells 1,000 words,"
or whatever it is, something like that,
the shroud has no words in it.
It's an image of a man
laying in the posture of death
and this tradition tells us that man
at that moment ascended.
That's what it says.
There's a lot of other documentation and history
that you can look into,
but coming back to just the facts on the shroud,
the shroud itself when you look at the science
with the tools we have today,
the individual who created it
left it for those that would have the tools,
first off, to see the real image,
the cameras, right?
Right.
You can't forge all the forensic evidence
and all the material on there.
It's impossible.
The shroud's story is the greatest mystery.
I've stayed a night inside the Great Pyramid of Giza,
I've gone to the pit
and it's an amazing mystery of our planet,
but the shroud is just beyond that.
What it points to, the testament that it tells us
for this time and place
is that within each individual
we have the ability to transcend
this level of existence using awareness.
Having a level of remembrance of our true self.
That's all it really is.
From the ancient sub Indian continent,
they have traditions that talk to this directly,
a science based on love and kindness
and compassion and attunement
that ends with a great completion.
It's called the rainbow body attainment,
the wisdom body attainment.
It's called the golden body.
Literally for various levels of attainment,
the body will disappear,
or it will become uncorruptible.
There are examples of this, well known.
Recent ones.
Talk about those.
There was a monk that passed away over in New Jersey.
He was a rinpoche.
I think this was in the year 2001.
I might have the year wrong, but I think 2001.
They wanted to do a puja,
they wanted to burn the body there.
They had to get everybody involved,
the city officials, the fire officials and people like this.
After four days, on the fifth day
the body started to corrupt,
but it was five days it was in perfect condition,
no sign of corruption.
The coroner and everybody said, "Nope, this man is dead."
Then they burned the body.
How did a person like Aurobindo and Yogananda
and many other examples
leave this plane of existence and their body not corrupt?
There's one really wonderful example over in Thailand.
A monk passed away in '78.
He's still sitting in jungles of Thailand,
cross legged, wearing sun glasses today.
(laughs) These are just amazing examples.
Right, I mean it's just, how?
How, right.
It's there, it's physically there.
It's not like you say it's a mystery
that you have to have faith on.
You can look at it, you can measure it.
The traveling mummy roadshow,
I think it was on Discovery, maybe National Geographic,
one of these stations.
They went and they took this body
and they did a CAT scan of it.
They thought he had been mummified.
They said, "No, he's still got his food in his belly."
That was '78.
It's not a shrine, you can go see.
That's a long digestive cycle.
He's also in the jungles where you don't last long.
Right, exactly.
You dissolve pretty quick back to dust.
They have a science that describes ascension.
It's pretty straightforward.
If you do this, this, and this,
these are the goals
and at the highest level,
you have the opportunity to attain this.
Jesus and many other prophets have said the same thing
and many saints since.
Saint Francis, Saint Clare.
The list goes on and on.
Even Mother Teresa.
The messages are always the same, very simple.
Love thy brother as thyself.
The one in Matthew that I used in the book a lot,
when he was asked,
"Teacher, what is the greatest commandment?"
He literally just says it the way it really is.
"Love your God with all your heart,
"your soul, and your mind.
"The second thing to do is love your neighbor as yourself."
The golden rule, and that's all there is to it.
That's really the bottom line to creating this.
The funny thing is now we're showing
with science and medical science
the value to you personally,
the well being to you personally by doing that.
That, I think, is the message I'm trying to share,
is that by having altruism, feeling compassion,
compassion is the only selfless emotion.
All other emotions are rooted in the egoic self.
They are rooted in self.
Compassion is selflessness,
and when you feel that, magic happens in the body.
It's a miracle but it's just the way the design is.
The design sets it up so that when you create this,
your heart is a gland, it produce certain things,
transmissions happen.
It's truly magical what happens,
even at the level of the cell.
Bruce Lipton, I know you've interviewed him.
The environment that's produced in the physical body
and around each cell,
when you feel all these wonderful godlike emotions,
humility, gratitude,
they set off changes within your body.
Physical changes.
I wanted to get to that part.
DNA, changes in the DNA.
You also extrapolate this about into the whole area
of longevity, even.
How does this all fit?
When you feel open and receptive,
loving, caring,
your body,
the wave form of your body
produces a certain geometry.
It expands.
If I was to see you electrically right now,
which is the phenomena that's maintaining you in 3D space,
your wave form looks like a Taurus, a doughnut.
It looks like an apple,
and that modulates slightly with each beat of your heart.
When you feel open receptivity,
the geometry of that wave form
that goes way out from your body,
you carry this thing at least 10 feet out,
measurably from your body,
that wave form, through resonance,
touches all your cells.
It communicates.
It communicates acoustically through the heart,
chemically through the heart,
neurotransmitters, hormones.
It communicates through the acoustic pressure waves
that are created,
and electrically, the signalling,
and ions are generated through the nervous system.
All these tell the body (sighs).
The DNA is just like a slinky.
When you feel expanded, it's expanded
and when you feel contracted, it's contracted.
When your wave form is expanded, your DNA is expanded
and when your DNA expands,
it allows different codons to be accessed.
It allows different chemical structures to be created,
different proteins to be created.
It changes literally the availability
of shifting radically your cells and your body structure,
the way the nervous system works.
We tested many different yogis
and they could do things.
Have pain and not show it.
It wasn't just mind over matter.
They literally changed the way
the nerves move through the body.
They said that's not reality to them.
They change their story.
Their story is different than the story that I have
right now, maybe.
If I prick my finger, it hurts.
Right.
Their story is different, so their reality is different.
When they're coming from the soul level of perspective,
knowing their eternity,
it doesn't have the same value, importance,
to protect everything and stay contracted.
Survival mode.
When we feel like we have to survive, we contract.
That changes literally,
I can't express how radically different,
your immune system,
everything alters when you feel contracted.
When you feel expanded and relaxed,
open, receptive,
which is the signature for love and kindness, caring,
that's what the heart's music looks like.
If you feel something for a child,
that's why the Madonna and child is a symbol,
because when you feel that level of caring
that you would feel for a child
like a mother would feel for a child,
for another soul,
that's level one compassion.
When you've awakened to your true nature,
and you're coming from that place,
then you know it.
You've experientially know that reality.
When you know that reality deeply,
you know that you're one person.
You feel deeply the suffering.
Sympathy is when I feel for you.
Compassion is when I feel as you.
It's different.
It's a very different state.
That's the optimum and the idealized state.
This is really, all of your work is based on
our understanding the true value of compassion
and all of the documentation and everything you did
in this book The Silent Gospel
is really toward that end
and leading us on a path or a journey through
in this case a lot of scientific inquiry
in addition to mystical understandings
to the understanding of the value of compassion
and what it brings to every cell in our body.
It was originally in the mystical traditions,
the spiritual traditions, religious traditions.
Jesus, when He was dying,
forgave the guys that were killing Him.
That level of compassion,
that level of knowing the Truth,
big T, Truth,
changes the way you perceive things.
It opens your body to opportunities
that are different,
and when you hit a certain level
of surrendering your identity's self, I,
then those are the things like I said before
that are anchoring this in physicality.
If you surrender it, what holds it in place?
It dissolves.
It dissolves in a blinding flash.
It's the easiest way to understand ascension --
That's the Shroud of Turin.
Right, it's a phase transition.
When awareness shifts,
literally form shifts,
and when the form shifts to the place
where it relinquishes all level of identity,
it surrenders.
It has submission.
Western culture, the best term is allowing.
Receptive allowing.
We use the term surrender.
A lot of us in the West get our backs up,
we don't like that.
Anyway, when you get to that level of allowing,
I find that it really, really changes
the physicality to a place where you can
let go of form.
My sense is right now from the science of it,
is that we live in a place where there's multi dimensions.
Existence changes from this existence
to another existence,
but you can only get to that existence
when you're finished with this existence.
You have to surrender it all back to divinity,
which is your true self.
You are divinity.
(peaceful music)
To learn more about James' groundbreaking work
on the subject of ascension,
pick up a copy of The Silent Gospel
by clicking on the link below.
Meanwhile, if this is the kind of wisdom you're looking for,
you will also likely enjoy our interviews
with Mitchell Gibson and Bruce Lipton.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(peaceful music)